---
layout: post
title: From the Dutch Hunger to Gaza - inheriting nightmare
subtitle: How famine shapes future generations
cover-img: https://images.pexels.com/photos/19488937/pexels-photo-19488937.jpeg
thumbnail-img: https://images.pexels.com/photos/8194912/pexels-photo-8194912.jpeg
share-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
tags: [Epigenetics, Molecular Biology, Gaza, News]
author: Anandi Tamby
---

Gaza is starving. The lastest numbers dropped last week, and they are chilling : one in three people in Gaza has not eaten in days. Over 50% of the population is in a catastrophic state. Fifteen deaths per days due to hunger. 

The immediate effects of hunger is well-documented : In the first stage, hunger leads to dry mouth, frequent urination, rapid weight loss and an irrepressible craving for food. In the  second stage, the  craving for food becomes less compelling and is replaced by apathy and an overall sense of weakness. Stored fat and sugar is burned, the immune system is impacted. Fluid accumulates in the cells, starting with the face, feet, and legs as hunger edema sets in. Premature aging occurs in the  third stage. The skin becomes pale, dry and flaky, parchment-like. Brown pigmentation appears, the hair falls out, movements become slower and clumsier. The fourth stage is often fatal. The heartbeat is slower, the blood pressure and body temperature are low. Throughout the experience, one is faced by fatigue, depression and apathy (1). Biomolecules from the body that are not immediately necessary to live are broken down and recycled to survive a little longer, in a process called “autophagy”  (2).

It also goes beyond. Such level of stress gets written in the DNA.

The information contained in DNA is regulated through mechanisms referred to as “epigenetics”. To summarize, DNA contains every information necessary to make a human, from fecundation to death. It was written through four billion years of evolution. So only a fraction of what is contained is actually useful information. And the way this information is emphasized is by ensuring that the useless one is inaccessible, through molecular modification of the DNA strand.

During  the last stage of Word War II, the Netherlands was struck by terrible famine, referred to as the Dutch Hunger Winter (1944-1945) or ‘Hunger Winter’ (Hongerwinter) (3,4). The origin of this famine was a German blockade, imposed in retaliation to the strikes imposed by the Dutch resistance. As a result, the population experienced sever malnutrition (400-800 calories/day), including pregnant women. This offered the unique opportunity to study the transgenerational effect of famine (3).

The result showed a direct effect of prenatal nutrition on the offspring’s DNA, causing a proportion to obesity, cardiovascular issues and neuropsychiatric disorders (such as schizophrenia and depression). The effects were visible decades after the event.

Right now, in Gaza, over 20 000 children are facing malnutrition. At least half a million of the household are facing a complete lack of food or other basic needs (5). On a larger scale, this situation is awfully parallel with the ones faced by Dutch families in the Hunger Winter. For many Palestinians of the Gaza strip, the effects of the Israeli blockade will make them for a lifetime. And it will likely mark their offspring too.  

As of July 2025, several scientific group, experts in epigenetics, have highlighted the urgency to provide appropriate aid to Gaza (3,4). This include nutritional support as an immediate response but also long-term preventative strategy against the wide range of adverse health effects in the offspring. As of right now, the only aid provided in Gaza is from the US and Israeli-founded Humanitarian Foundation (GHF). Their plan has been qualified of ‘grossly inadequate’ by the World Health Organization (WHO). The WHO, aligned with the UN demands a global humanitarian based on the principles of humanity, impartiality, independence and neutrality. Pre-established humanitarian aid, led by the UN and its partners, is already in place and must be allowed to function fully to ensure that aid is delivered and the effect of extreme hunger be mitigated (6). 



1.	Ciesielska M, Łazarskiego U, Gajewski P, Bałuk-Ulewiczowa T. Medical Review Auschwitz-Medicine Behind the Barbed Wire [Internet]. 2018. Available from: [link](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344161872)
2.	González-Rodríguez P, Füllgrabe J, Joseph B. The hunger strikes back: an epigenetic memory for autophagy. Vol. 30, Cell Death and Differentiation. Springer Nature; 2023. p. 1404–15. 
3.	Khatib H, Ellsworth E, Badhwar N. Epigenetic Consequences of Famine: Lessons Learned and Future Research Directions [Internet]. 2025. Available from: [link] (https://www.preprints.org/manuscript/202507.0908/v1)
4.	Khoodoruth MAS, Khoodoruth WNC kai. From past famines to present crises: The epigenetic impact of maternal malnutrition on offspring health in Gaza. Asian J Psychiatr. 2024 May 1;95. 
5.	 UN news, In Gaza, mounting evidence of famine and widespread starvation 29 July 2025. Available : [link](https://news.un.org/en/story/2025/07/1165517)
6. 	WHO Media Team, People in Gaza starving, sick and dying as aid blockade continues,12 May 2025.  Available : [link](https://www.who.int/news/item/12-05-2025-people-in-gaza-starving--sick-and-dying-as-aid-blockade-continues)
